[Music] Good day I'm Norman Wildberger in this
video I want to introduce you to the three-fold
symmetry of what I call Chromo geometry which
is a remarkable 21st century development in
modern geometry and it's basically an observation
about the fact that we can view planer geometry
in three coherent but different ways where ukian
geometry is only one of the three possible ways
and the other two are complimentary kinds of
relativistic geometries in the context of the
projective line that means that there's not
only the blue ukian geometry that's available
and also the red relativistic geometry that
I talked to you about last time there's also
this third geometry which called Green geometry
which I want to talk about today so there's a
remarkable symmetry between these three different
kinds of geometry blue red and green and it's
visible already in this one-dimensional setting
so this unites ukan geometry and two relativistic
geometries but it does also something else It
transends Felix Klein's air longan program this
is a very important direction for geometry almost
a definition of what geometry was introduced by
Felix Klein in the uh 1800s and really had a major
impact on the way 20th century mathematics thought
about geometry and its role so we're going to go
beyond that we're going to see that in fact the a
longan program ultimately is too limiting and that
we need a broader Vista and there will be many new
possible theorems that are created um from this
uh view just having also with Elementary planer
geometry so lots of opportunities for amateurs
or professional mathematicians to get involved
and start discovering really interesting and
ultimately kind of fundamental facts about the
real world which have been up till now sort of
hidden to us it's really quite a remarkable thing
so let's have a look at this green relativistic
structure a third kind of projective quadrants
that we can impose on our projective line so
we're going to define a new quadrants defined
by Q of X1 y1 to X2 Y2 is this quantity here it
has the same numerator that we're familiar with
X1 Y2 - X2 y1 2 there's a minus sign out front
and in the denominator it's just the product
of all four entries four X1 y1 X2 Y2 this is
also conveniently homogeneous if we multiply
the first proportion by five then the numerator
gets multiplied by 25 and the denominator also
gets multiplied by 25 so it stays unchanged and
it turns out that this same expression can be
Rewritten as 1us X1 Y2 + X2 y1 2ar over 4x1 y1 *
X2 Y2 call this the green projective quadrants the
equality here rests on the following identity
so here's another kind of identity in the same
direction as the Fibonacci identity but somewhat
different X1 Y2 + X2 y1 2 - X1 Y2 - X2 y1 2 = 4x1
y1 X2 Y2 and it's almost obvious if you square
this then the squares of the outside two things
will cancel with the squares of the outside two
things here and then what you get left is the
cross terms here which is 2 * the product of all
four and then plus 2 * that same product to give
four let me say a little bit about U the physical
significance so this will be familiar in some
form or another to physicists who are watching
this so what we're doing here is really looking
at the relativistic plane projectively but but
we're sort of changing coordinates if you like
so that the usual null points ones I called A+
and a minus are rotated so that they form our
basis vectors so this is a very popular thing
to do in physics and it's always well known
and so physicists will perhaps see this is quite
familiar and they might actually wonder why we're
doing this and they might say well this is just
the red relativistic geometry rotated around so
what's the point well the point is that it's
this three-fold symmetry that arises which is
not at all obvious but you will see that once we
introduce this thing it really does have a a place
beside the red relativistic geometry it's sort
of an equal partner in some ways okay so along
the same lines as we talked about with the red
relativistic geometry we can define null lines
these are lines for which the kind of quadrants
we' defined here doesn't make sense because the
denominators have a zero so if we have a point one
to zero or 0 to one those points will contribute a
zero in the denominator if we tried to form a
quadrants with them so they have some special
role they're called null lines we also have an
underlying notion of perpendicularity which is
that X1 to y1 is perpendicular to X2 to Y2
precisely when X1 Y2 + X2 y1 equal 0 this is
the bilinear form that's really underneath this
geometry and it's appearing here and in fact also
here so the perpendicularity um here's an example
3 to 1 is perpendicular to 3 to minus1 if you
multiply either of the coordinates by a minus
one then you get a perpendicular um projective
one point so let's look at some examples our
familiar projective Line 3: 1 1: 2 1 to minus1
2 to-3 let's compute some projective quadrant is
in this green fashion so for example between 3:
1 and 1:2 we'll use this formula here that the
quadrants is 1 minus the dot product between these
the Green Dot product which is 3 * 2 2 + 1 * 1 all
squared divided 4 * the product of all four things
3 * 1 * 1 * 2 and that turns out to be -25 over
24 so that's the green quadrants between these
two one points between 1 to 2 and 2 to minus 3
similarly we get uh 1 - 1 * -3 + 2 * 2 all squared
ID four * the product of all four things you
can check that that's 49 over 48 and between 3:
1 and 2 to- 3 you can check that we get 121 over
72 and your first exercise is to show that in fact
these three numbers also satisfy the projective
triple quad formula which we can write efficiently
as s of the three quantities is zero so I remind
you that s is A + B + C all squared - 2 * a
s + B2 + C 2 - 4 a c all right so uh that's very
nice story note that I've put the axes in green
here the axes are actually the null directions in
this geometry those are the particular one points
that you can't create quadrant with other points
because there will be a zero in the denominator
so they play the same role as did the red uh lines
that we talked about in our red geometry okay so
here are some familiar exercises for you first
of all show that the green projective quadrant
satisfies the same kind of range of values as does
the red one namely that it's always less than or
equal to zero or greater than or equal to 1 never
gets in that range between 0 and 1 that's reserved
for the blue ukian projective quadrants and show
that The Familiar projective triple quad formula
also applies to this relativistic situation all
right so now we get to Chromo geometry what is it
well it refers to a threefold symmetry between
the blue ukian geometry and the red and green
relativistic geometries these three geometries
connect with each other there's a symmetry between
them so this symmetry has two aspects sort of
an elementary and a more sophisticated one at
the elementary level the claim is that there's an
essential Unity between all three that if we look
at things in the right way we can expect the
same kinds of phenomena to appear in the blue
red and green now this is not Universal this
is is just a a general tendency okay this is
what expectation that we have sometimes it's not
exactly the case but more or less we can expect
that mathematically these three geometries are
actually much more similar than they are different
and then the more sophisticated and ultimately
more interesting aspect of Chromo geometry is
that when we consider all three geometries at once
remarkable new relations come into view so it's
the interaction between these three geometries
that's somehow really special and unique and
seemingly doesn't have an analog in other areas
of mathematics of course in physics physicists
are very interested in three-fold symmetry
because fundamental particles have a kind of
Chromo aspect as well physic talk about red blue
and green in their uh chromodynamics Theory it's
sort of interesting to speculate whether this
might have anything to do with that physics
but that's purely speculation all right so let's
have a look so what actually goes on here with
this new subject of Chromo geometry so I hope
this background reain is not uh too distracting
it's been bucketing down in Sydney for the last
few days okay so we are going to introduce some
notation now so that we can deal with all of
these three geometries at the same time and to
distinguish them so let's introduce superscripts
B e r and g to refer to blue red and green so
we'll now talk about the blue projective quadrants
the red projective quadrants the green projective
quadrants and here are the various formulas for
them I'm going to put the one minus uh Formula
First there's a little bit more uniformity between
these different Expressions we're basically just
replacing the bilinear form with different kinds
in each situation and here here are the alternate
forms the more original ones that always have the
same numerator uh term X1 Y2 - X2 y1 so there's
corresponding bilinear forms here if that means
anything to you I'll just write down the matrices
for the blue red and green bilinear forms so
these are sort of the matrices that create the
bilinear forms that are occurring here in these
uh three different Expressions we will be talking
more about what bilinear forms are and so on at
a greater length later I'll just put that there
for reference okay so these are our three basic
ways of measuring and we're going to be thinking
about having our pizza with all three geometries
going at the same time so there's three different
projective quadran all happening at the same time
okay so our first theorem in chroma geometry is
the colored quadrant theorem which asserts
that for any projective one points A1 and A2
the three different quadrant is the blue the
red and the green one are related there's a
relationship between them and it is 1/ QB of A1
A2 + 1 / QR of A1 A2 + 1 / qg of A1 A2 equals
2 the proof well it follows from this identity
right here this is an identity X12 + y1 2 * X2
2 + Y2 2 - X1 2 - y1 2 * X2 2 - Y 2^ 2
- 4 X1 y1 X2 Y2 = 2 * X1 Y2 - X2 y1 all
squared so if you just take this expression
divide by the square here so there's just a
two on the right hand side then you can
see that each one of these things is the
reciprocal of the corresponding quadrants
is so for example if we look at our favorite
two projective one points namely 1 to two and
3: 1 then we've seen that the blue quadrants
between them is a half the red quadrants
between them is 25 over 24 and the green
one happened to be minus 25 over 24 which you
might have thought was a coincidence then and
now we see that the relationship between
these three numbers is 2 plus 24 over 25
plus - 24 over 25 in other words the sum of the
reciprocals of these things does in fact equal
two and we can see sort of why these are
negatives of each other it's because this
one's a half if this one's a half then it's
reciprocal as two which will exactly cancel
out with a two on the right hand side
and then necessarily these two have to
be negatives of each other so it's actually a
rather General situation that happens whenever
we have 45° in the ukian setting of course
45° is rather arbitrary isn't it I mean
it's going back to the Babylonians much
more sensible to talk about a projective
quadrants of 1/2 that's the real number
that's associated to lines that are like
this okay so very attractive fundamental relation
that shows that yes indeed there certainly is
some kind of thing going on between these three
different types of geometry they are interacting
whenever we have a notion of projective
quadrants around we have an Associated notion
of perpendicularity so in the blue setting that's
perpendicular but in the red and green geometries
perpendicularity has a different meaning and a
different physical manifestation so we want to
consider them all at once so we need some way of
referring to each one so we'll introduce these
subscripts B R and G besides or just behind the
usual perpendicular sign so if A1 and A2 are two
projective points given as usual then we'll say
that A1 is blue perpendicular to A2 precisely when
X1 X2 + y1 Y2 equal 0 they're red perpendicular
precisely when x1x2 - y1 Y2 = 0 and they are green
perpendicular precisely when X1 Y2 + X2 y1 equals
0 so we have three Notions of perpendicularity
and closely associated to that let's talk
about what we might call perpendiculars so
given a projective one point there's exactly
one line which is perpendicular to it in any
one of the given geometries you can call that
the perpendicular line so if a is equal to X
to Y then let's define a super B to be minus YX
a super R to be y tox and a Super G to be X to
minus y we call these respectively the blue red
and green perpendiculars of a because these two
are in fact blue perpendicular because this time
this plus this time this equals z these two are
red perpendicular because this time this minus
this * this equals 0 and these are green perp
particular because this time this plus this *
this equals 0 sort of canonical perpendiculars
for any projective one point all right so for
an example if a is our projective one point
one to two then its blue perpendicular is min -
2 to 1 which is here and that is the usual blue
perpendicular the standard ukian one denoted by
The Familiar uh blue square there then a subr the
red perpendicular of this will be this one here
which is to us just the reflection of this line
in the line yal X or the line y = - x so a regular
ukian or blue reflection the green perpendicular
of this one is 1 to minus 2 which is this line
here the green perpendicularity is expressed
like that little angle there in green and again
this is the reflection in the green null line
in a ukian sense so green perpendicularity
just amounts to reflection in either of the
coordinate axes red perpendicular it amounts
to Reflections in the lines y = x or y = - x
and the blue perpendicularity is the usual one
rotation of a quarter turn okay now we have this
theorem that for any projective 1 Point a there is
a relationship between these three perpendiculars
a super b a super r a Super G have a relationship
and the relationship is that the blue quadrants
between a super R and a Super G is equal to one
which is to say that they are perpendicular in a
blue setting let's see what that means so where
is a subr here was a subr where's a subg here
is a subg the claim is that this one and this
one are in fact blue perpendicular I think you
can see that they are the next statement says the
same thing that the red quadrants between a super
b and a Super G is also one that means these
two things are red perpendicular so a super
B is there a Super G is there and yes these
are red perpendicular geometrically they're
reflections of each other around this line y - x
or y x and finally quadrants green of a super b
and a super R is also equal to one so there's
another perpendicularity there between a super
b and a super R these are green perpendicular
one's the reflection of the other in either of
the coordinate axes and the proof well it's
a relatively simple computation if a is the
point x to Y then this first thing is the blue
quadrants between y to X that's a super R and
X to minus y which is a Super G and when we take
the blue quadrants you can calculate that's equal
to one because it's 1 minus something with the dot
product uh in the numerator the dot product here
will be zero so it'll just be one similarly
to the next one we're taking a red quadrant
between a super b and a Super G so again it's
one minus something with a DOT product in the
numerator and the dotproduct is this time this
minus this time this which is zero so we get one
and the green quadrants between a super b and a
super R there's a super B there's a super R the
green quadrants is 1 minus something with a DOT
product which is this time this plus this time
this which is zero so again we get one so this's
actually quite a lot of different perpendicular
ities floating around in this diagram not just
the original ones but also new perpendicular
between the perpendiculars themselves but these
three colors are interacting here you see that
you need all three of them to really see what's
going on okay so reference for this is my paper
onedimensional metrical geometry which I've
also mentioned a few videos ago in uh geometria
dedicata 2007 if you want to have a look so
I'd like to next time uh explore this world
of these three different geometries still in the
onedimensional setting but I want to connect it
a little bit more with some geometry and some
Physics so I want to talk about connections
with Einstein's special theory of relativity
very briefly and I also want to give you a
physical way of thinking about what the mean
of these projective quadran is and we have a
reasonable understanding of what the ukian one
is but what do the green and the red ones mean
well it'll turn out that we can understand that
through the use of a uh lovely tool which I'm
going to call Paul Miller's protractor named after
a viewer at this channel who made some interesting
discoveries so I hope you'll join me for that I'm
Norman Wildberger thanks for listening [Music]
h